Add EIP: EOF - EXTCODEADDRESS instruction (#9342)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7880.md

---
eip: 7880
title: EOF - EXTCODEADDRESS instruction
description: Add EXTCODEADDRESS instruction to EOF to address code delegation use cases
author: Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7880-eof-extcodeaddress-instruction/22845
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core

> created: 2024-09-01

Reviewer: ```suggestion
created: 2025-02-08
```

| `GAS_COLD_ACCOUNT_ACCESS` | Defined as `2600` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Spec Constants] |
| `GAS_WARM_ACCESS`         | Defined as `100` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Spec Constants]  |

We introduce a new EOFv1 instruction `EXTCODEADDRESS` (`0xea`).

EOF code which contains this instruction prior to the fork activating this instruction is considered invalid. Beginning with the first block this EIP is activated in, this instruction is added to the set of valid EOFv1 instructions.

### Execution Semantics

#### `EXTCODEADDRESS`

- Deduct `GAS_WARM_ACCESS` gas
- pop 1 argument `target_address` from the stack
- if `target_address` has any of the high 12 bytes set to a non-zero value (i.e. it does not contain a 20-byte address), then halt with an exceptional failure
  - Notice: Future expansion of the EVM address space may enlarge the number of valid addresses. Do not rely on this step always halting with the current restrictions.
- deduct `GAS_COLD_ACCOUNT_ACCESS - GAS_WARM_ACCESS` if `target_address` is not in `accessed_addresses` and add `target_address` to `accessed_addresses`
- Load the code from `target_address` and refer to it as `loaded_code`

> - If `loaded_code` indicates a delegation designator (for example, `0xef0100` as defined in [EIP-7702]) push the address of the designation onto the stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If `loaded_code` indicates a delegation designator (for example, prefixed with `0xef0100` as defined in [EIP-7702]) push the address of the designation onto the stack.
```

  - Notice: if [EIP-7702] delegation designations are updated in a future fork (such as allowing chained delegations), then this section is expected to comply with any such hypothetical changes. 
- Otherwise, push `target_adress` onto the stack.

> Note: If `target_address` or the delegation designator points to an account with a contract mid-creation then the code is empty and returns `0` (`TYPE_NONE`). This is aligned with similar behavior of instructions like `EXTCODESIZE`.

Reviewer: should it also be added in form of a note, that EXTCODEADDRESS belongs (somewhat awkwardly) to the group of code executing instructions, in the language of [7702](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7702#delegation-designation)

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's necessary, and would be awkward indeed

> Note: If `target_address` or the delegation designator points to an account with a contract mid-creation then the code is empty and returns `0` (`TYPE_NONE`). This is aligned with similar behavior of instructions like `EXTCODESIZE`.

Reviewer 2: In case of delegation designator pointing to address mid-creation, it's true that `EXTCODESIZE` returns `0`, but why would `EXTCODEADDRESS` do so? I think it should still return the delegate address.
```suggestion
Note: If `target_address` points to an account with a contract mid-creation then the code is empty and returns `0` (`TYPE_NONE`). This is aligned with similar behavior of instructions like `EXTCODESIZE`.
```

Reviewer: Good point, but I would even go further. If `target_address` points to an account with a contract mid-creation, it should return `target_address`, in line with the generic rule "Otherwise, push `target_adress` onto the stack." above.

I missed this on first read. EXTCODEADDRESS should by principle return the address which holds the code which would execute if `target_address` was CALLed, regardless of what that code is.

Reviewer 2: >  EXTCODEADDRESS should by principle return the address which holds the code which would execute if target_address was CALLed, regardless of what that code is.

If it is called when delegate is mid-creation, empty code is executed, right? not the delegation designator interpreted as code.

Reviewer: right, but we're returning the address of that empty code, not the empty code. I'd say that mid-creationness should have nothing to do here, and this `Note` could be removed.

Reviewer 2: > right, but we're returning the address of that empty code, not the empty code. 

This confused me, but my logic is:
- `EXTCODEADDRESS(target)` where `target` has regular code, returns `target` because `CALL(target)` executes `target.code`
- `EXTCODEADDRESS(target)` where `target` has delegation designator, returns `delegate_address` because `CALL(target)` executes `delegate_address.code`
- `EXTCODEADDRESS(target)` where `target` has delegation designator, but `delegate_address` is mid-creation, returns `delegate_address` because `CALL(target)` executes `delegate_address.code` (empty code), and not `target.code` (delegation designator)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: If `target_address` points to an account with a contract mid-creation, then `target_address` is returned. If delegation designator points to an account with a contract mid-creation, then address of the designation is returned.
```

Reviewer: > `target_address` should be returned in both these cases, but I would keep the note about it to be explicit.

Wait, no :). Your above 3 points seem correct to me, but not this (assuming you're referring to the original two cases in the `Note`). The mid-creation cases should just follow the general logic specced above (and to not confuse, we'd better remove the `Note`):

So:

- `EXTCODEADDRESS(target)` where `target` has delegation designator, but `delegate_address` is mid-creation, returns `delegate_address`, just like if `delegate_address` held empty code, code or another delegation
- otherwise `EXTCODEADDRESS(target)` where `target` is mid-creation, returns `target`, just like if `target` held empty code or code

Mid-creationnes has no effect, the only branch of the logic is on whether `target.code` has delegation designator or not.

Reviewer: Yea, your second suggested change looks ok to me (I'd still at least add that being midcreation has no effect whatsoever, in addition to the scenarios you've given).

---
eip: 7880
title: EOF - EXTCODEADDRESS instruction
description: Add EXTCODEADDRESS instruction to EOF to address code delegation use cases
author: Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7880-eof-extcodeaddress-instruction/22845
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-09-01
requires: 7692, 7702, 7761
---

## Abstract

> Add an instruction to EOF that reads code delegation designations from the account without requiring code introspection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add an instruction to EOF that reads code delegation designations from an account without requiring code introspection.
```

## Motivation

EOFv1 as scoped in [EIP-7692] removes code introspection capabilities from the EVM, preventing EOF from reading raw code values such as code delegation designations set by [EIP-7702]. There are a number of use cases where reading the delegation designation of [EIP-7702] would allow contracts to be more proactive about user experience issues.

> One example would be a managed proxy contract. Such a contract may want to ensure security by not allowing the proxy to be updated to a delegated address. There are also safety concerns with pointing to a delegation, as the contract may be updated to non EOF code and `EXTDELEGATECALL` will no longer be able to call the contract, due to changes outside the control of the managed proxy contract.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One example is a managed proxy contract. Such a contract may want to ensure security by not allowing the proxy to be updated to a delegated address. There are also safety concerns with pointing to a delegation, as the contract may be updated to non EOF code and `EXTDELEGATECALL` will no longer be able to call the contract, due to changes outside the control of the managed proxy contract.
```

> To address this the essential task of the designation parsing is moved into a new opcode `EXTCODEADDRESS`, where the task of calculating the delegated address will be performed.  For non-delegated accounts or empty accounts the address will be the same as the queried address.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To address this the essential task of the designation parsing is moved into a new opcode `EXTCODEADDRESS`, where the task of calculating the delegated address will be performed. For non-delegated accounts or empty accounts the address will be the same as the queried address.
```

## Specification

### Parameters

| Constant                  | Value                                                              |
|---------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `FORK_BLKNUM`             | tbd                                                                |

Reviewer 3: Forks are done based on timestamp rather than block number

Reviewer 4: also we don't now mention a block num/timestamp constant which would need to be updated. we can say on activation of this EIP if this is just a standard timestamp hf activation, else just refer to FORK_TIMESTAMP if needed for a fork boundary logic

Author: Good catch.  On deeper reflection referring to a specific activation block or timestamp is also not quite right, we should be referenceing the block the fork is activated, which will be different on mainnet, devnets, and L2s.

Reworded it to reference fork activation, agnostic of how it is activagted.

| `GAS_COLD_ACCOUNT_ACCESS` | Defined as `2600` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Spec Constants] |
| `GAS_WARM_ACCESS`         | Defined as `100` in the [Ethereum Execution Layer Spec Constants]  |

We introduce a new EOFv1 instruction on the block number `FORK_BLKNUM`: `EXTCODEADDRESS` (`0xTBD`)

EOF code which contains this instruction before `FORK_BLKNUM` is considered invalid. Beginning with block `FORK_BLKNUM` `0xTBD` is added to the set of valid EOFv1 instructions.

### Execution Semantics

#### `EXTCODEADDRESS`

> - deduct `GAS_WARM_ACCESS` gas

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Deduct `GAS_WARM_ACCESS` gas
```
Consistent capitalisation in list

- If `loaded_code` indicates a delegation designator (for example, `0xef0100` as defined in [EIP-7702]) push the address of the designation onto the stack.
  - Notice: if [EIP-7702] delegation designations are updated in a future fork (such as allowing chained delegations), then this section is expected to comply with any such hypothetical changes. 
- Otherwise, push `target_adress` onto the stack.

Note: If `target_address` or the delegation designator points to an account with a contract mid-creation then the code is empty and returns `0` (`TYPE_NONE`). This is aligned with similar behavior of instructions like `EXTCODESIZE`.

Note: Only `target_address` is warmed. If a delegation is found the address that it is delegated to is not added to the `accessed_addresses`. Also, whether the delegated address is in `accessed_addresses` has no impact on the gas charged for the operation.

## Rationale

This EIP is very similar to [EIP-7761], which introduces account type introspection. Its rationale is included by reference as they all apply to this situation.

### Alternative: Return the whole designation, have contract parse

> One alternative is to have a specially limited `EXTCODECOPY` that would return just delegation designations. Apart from the general objections to code introspection this would then lock in and limit delegation designation formats and capabilities that must be preserved in future forks. By allowing access to the effect of the delegation rather than the mechanism EOF preserves space for the mechanism to be changed without breaking existing code. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One alternative is to have a specially limited `EXTCODECOPY` that would return just delegation designations. Apart from the general objections to code introspection this would then lock in and limit delegation designation formats and capabilities that must be preserved in future forks. By allowing access to the effect of the delegation rather than the mechanism, EOF preserves space for the mechanism to be changed without breaking existing code. 
```
Last sentence I find a bit confusing, maybe could be reworded
